OOD update (#420)
hpcleuven/VscDocumentation: source/leuven/services/openondemand.rst

For more detail on how to run jobs on wICE, check out our 
:ref:`quick start guide<wice_t2_leuven>`.

> The jobs tab has three menus, 'Active Jobs', 'Job Composer' and 'Projects' (which you cannot do much with it

Reviewer: Perhaps mention that 'projects'  is planned feature for one of the next upstream OOD updates?

Author: done

To launch any of the interactive apps, you need to fill in the resources form.
Most of the options in the resource forms are similar across all apps, but some apps require additional input from the user.
These will be explained in the specific paragraph about the apps.
A more detailed guide on how to choose your resources is available in the next chapter.
Beware that by launching any app you will end up in a regular queue, so requesting a large amount of resources might result in a long queue time.

- Cluster: allows choosing between one of our :ref:`Tier-2 clusters <kul_tier2>` in production, namely Genius or wICE
- Account: the credit account you want to deduct the credits from.
  The accounts associated with your VSC number will be displayed in a dropdown menu.
- Partition: you can choose any of the existing partitions on both clusters.
  The partition names depend on your choice of cluster.
  We recommend using the ``interactive`` partition for most interactive work.
- Numbers of hours: your walltime (min 1h).
- Number of cores: the amount of cores per node. This defaults to 1.
- Required memory per core in megabytes. This defaults to 3400 MB.

> - Number of GPUs. Depending on the partition you have requested, you might get a different GPU.

Reviewer: This is different now, as each GPU type now has its own partition. So you always get the GPU type of the partition.

Author: Do you want me to remove the rest of the text after the first sentence?
I think the rest of the information are still valid, no?

Reviewer: The part about the interactive partition is rather relevant for ondemand though, as this is the preferred partition where users submit their interactive sessions to. So at least mentioning that you can get a GPU on the interactive partition seems important. The whole part about the type of GPU, yes I would remove that.

Author: The updated text already reflects your idea. But, you might want to check it again.

  The default is 0.
  The acquired GPU will be the same as the type specified in the partition (e.g. a NVidia H100 for ``gpu_h100`` on wICE).
  For wICE, you can also request a GPU from the ``interactive`` partition.
  One GPU here is a virtual GPU slice of the available A100 GPUs.
  One GPU slice is the same as 1/7th of an A100 GPU.

>   You can specify the type of GPU as well: ``[Type]:<number>`` (e.g. ``A100:2``).

Reviewer: This option has become somewhat redundant, as there is indeed only one GPU type per partition. Perhaps we can just remove it from the explanation?

Author: done

``numpy``, ``pandas`` and more) and/or ``matplotlib`` in your environment from the same 'Toolchain year'.

Once you launch a JupyterLab session, a default kernel called ``Python 3 (ipykernel)`` is already available in your session.
This kernel, in addition to the Python standard library, would enable using extra packages from
``SciPy-bundle`` and/or ``matplotlib``, if you already selected them.

If the "standard" environment explained above does not provide all packages that you need, then
it is recommended to manage your custom-made R or Python environments using Conda.
You should :ref:`install Miniconda <install_miniconda_python>` if you have not installed it yet.

To create any other kernel, first create a  :ref:`Python <create_python_conda_env>` or
:ref:`R <create_r_conda_env>` Conda environment. The second step consists out of effectively
creating the kernel in your ``$VSC_HOME/.local`` folder, as Jupyter will look for kernels in this location.
The following commands should be excecuted from a shell (e.g. using 'Login Server Shell Access'), and only need
to be done once for the set-up of each new kernel.

> If you already have an existing Python kernel, but your JupyterLab session freeses/craches when choosing your

Reviewer: 'freezes'

old kernel, you also need to repeat the following steps only once.
This starts with activating your Conda environment::

      source activate <env_name>

For Python you will need the ``ipykernel`` package installed in your Conda environment::

      conda install ipykernel

Then you create the kernel as follows::

      python -m ipykernel install --user --env PYTHONPATH "" --name '<env_name>' --display-name '<kernel_name>'

> 

Reviewer 2: I tried with an older kernel (Python 3.6.8, ipython 7.6.1,ipykernel 5.1.1) and got an error: 
 ipython-kernel-install: error: unrecognized arguments: --env PYTHONPATH
with a newer kernel (Python 3.8.16, ipython 8.8.0, ipykernel 6.19.2) re-registering worked and solved the issue. 

do we need  a minimum version to fix this?

Author: perhaps, yes.

Author: I checked few conda environments, and I updated the text accordingly:

"The minimum supported version for Python is 3.7 and for ``ipykernel`` package is 6.19.2."

Reviewer 2: To make it very clear put it in a "note: " ?

  (R gets attached as soon as you start it).
- You can also set the path to the R version that needs to be attached (better if you always
  use the same Conda environment).
  Go to 'Extensions', and click the settings wheel next to the R extension.
  Select 'Extension Settings' and search for the 'R > RTerm: Linux' setting.
  Paste the path to your Conda env there (``/path/to/miniconda/envs/<env_name>/lib/R``)

**Remarks:**

- To run your script line-by-line, place your cursor on a desired line, and press the key combination of
  'ctrl+enter' on your keyboard.

.. _ood_matlab_app:

MATLAB
------

To launch MATLAB via OnDemand, you need to additionally specify your desired version of the software
from the drop-down menu on the resource form.
Given that our current MATLAB installations automatically detect GPU devices and CUDA libraries,
you may also request GPU(s) as resources, if needed.

Once you launch the session, a remote `noVNC`_ desktop will start on a compute node.
Before clicking on the 'Launch MATLAB' button, one may still change the compression level and
the image quality of the transferred noVNC frames.

> E.g. opting for the lowest compression level and highest image quality can give you a crisp VNC desktop.

Reviewer: As we will have more and more VNC apps, it might be good to move the resolution part to the general resource description above.

Once the session starts, the selected MATLAB module will be loaded, and eventually the MATLAB GUI
will pop up (after waiting for few seconds).

While your session is running, you can provide a view-only access to other VSC users.

> For that, click on the 'View Only (Share-able Link)' button to copy the URL into your clipboard,

Reviewer: Same for the view-only. Perhaps move this to a more general part of the docs

Author: done

and be able to share it with others.

.. warning::

   As the end-user, you are responsible for all consequences of sharing your MATLAB session with other
   VSC users.
   So, think twice before sharing your sensitive data, sources and information by all means.

ParaView
--------

For visualization purposes, you may use the `ParaView app <https://www.paraview.org/>`_.
Similar to the :ref:`MATLAB app <ood_matlab_app>`, ParaView also runs inside a `noVNC`_
desktop as a compute job. An additional similarity to the :ref:`MATLAB app <ood_matlab_app>` is the choice for
controlling the desktop resolution.

**Remarks:**

> - Currently, using GPUs in ParaVies is not supported yet, and just the CPU-only modules are offered.

Reviewer: 'ParaView'

This is put in place to ensure that these resources are kept for their original purpose, namely the interactive work.

If for some reason some of these limitations are too strict for you, or you need resources that are not available on
the interactive nodes (e.g. a full GPU, big memory nodes), you can always request nodes from another partition.
Remember however that these interactive apps are not meant for running full jobs.
If you indeed need multiple nodes or full GPUs to test your code/program, go ahead and request the resources for
your interactive app from a more suited partition.

> In the case that you have passed the testing phase, and you want to start conducting experiments;

Author: leftover from the past. changed `;` with `,`

we recommend that you make the switch to batch jobs instead, as they will not require your presence to start your code.

.. _interactive_shell:

Interactive shell
-----------------

This app will launch a shell on (one of) the requested node(s), allowing you to use these compute resources
from within a Linux terminal.
This is different than the shell you get in the "Clusters - Login Server Shell Access" menu,
which directs you towards one of the login nodes.

JupyterLab
-----------

With this app you can create or (re)run Jupyter Notebooks. This can be handy both for R and Python coding.
In the app resource form, besides the normal choices (:ref:`listed above <interactive-apps>`), you can also choose

> a 'Toolchain year' such as '2023a' from a drop-down menu.

Author: I have made the change. I have to also remember to change the field title on the form from 'Toolchain year' to 'Toolchain version' later.

Based on that choice, a correct JupyterLab module will be loaded together with its dependencies (specifically Python).

> To reproduce your numerical results at any time in the future, make sure you stick to choosing the same 'Toolchain year'.

Author: I elaborated on how to create and use kernels from python venv. As you see above, it might be involved for some users. So, the question would be whether we want to support it or not. Let's take this internal discussion outside this PR.

Furthermore, you may optionally choose to load ``SciPy-bundle`` (for widely-used packages like ``scipy``,
``numpy``, ``pandas`` and more) and/or ``matplotlib`` in your environment from the same 'Toolchain year'.

Once you launch a JupyterLab session, a default kernel called ``Python 3 (ipykernel)`` is already available in your session.
This kernel, in addition to the Python standard library, would enable using extra packages from
``SciPy-bundle`` and/or ``matplotlib``, if you already selected them.

If the "standard" environment explained above does not provide all packages that you need, then

> it is recommended to manage your custom-made R or Python environments using Conda.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
it is recommended to manage your custom-made R or Python environments using Conda or Python virtual environments.
```

Author: Sure, but I did it slightly differently now.

You should :ref:`install Miniconda <install_miniconda_python>` if you have not installed it yet.

To create any other kernel, first create a  :ref:`Python <create_python_conda_env>` or
:ref:`R <create_r_conda_env>` Conda environment. The second step consists out of effectively

> creating the kernel in your ``$VSC_HOME/.local`` folder, as Jupyter will look for kernels in this location.

Reviewer 3: I know you only changed the linebreaks here, but maybe it would be good to fix this part. Because it's not always ``$VSC_HOME/.local``, isn't it rather ``$XDG_DATA_HOME``?

Author: Is it better now?

The following commands should be excecuted from a shell (e.g. using 'Login Server Shell Access'), and only need
to be done once for the set-up of each new kernel.
If you already have an existing Python kernel, but your JupyterLab session freezes/craches when choosing your
old kernel, you also need to repeat the following steps only once.
This starts with activating your Conda environment::

      source activate <env_name>

For Python you will need the ``ipykernel`` package installed in your Conda environment::

      conda install ipykernel

Then you create the kernel as follows::

      python -m ipykernel install --user --env PYTHONPATH "" --name '<env_name>' --display-name '<kernel_name>'

For R, you need both the ``jupyter_client`` and the ``irkernel`` package installed. With the following command you can create the kernel::

      Rscript -e 'IRkernel::installspec(name="<env_name>", displayname="<kernel_name>")'

Once the kernel is (re)created, you will see it in the 'Launcher' menu. You can now start working in your own customized environment.

> Note that all user kernels are stored by default in ``${VSC_HOME}/.local/share/jupyter/kernels``, but we strongly advice you

Reviewer 3: (same remark here as above, about ``$XDG_DATA_HOME``)

Author: Sure. Let me know what you think here.

Reviewer 3: (I think this is now further discussed in a new thread)

to stay away from modifying the contents of this folder, unless you are aware of the consequences.

For more general information, please refer to the `official JupyterLab documentation`_.

**Remarks:**

- The top-level notebook directory is ``$VSC_DATA``.
- At the moment, we do not support installing extensions in JupyterLab.
- One may create a customized kernel starting from a Python virtual environment, using one of Python modules.
  This approach has interesting advantages, such as isolating a specific work environment, and also
  installing packages into your data directory using ``pip install --prefix=${VSC_DATA}/<project-folder> <package-names>``.

>   If you are interested in this approach, contact your local HPC support for step-by-step instructions.

Reviewer 3: (So this is the `Remark` I was referring to in my comments above and which I'd like to see converted in a separate paragraph with more info. IMO this is something that should also be illustrated here, referring to HPC support is not sufficient.)

Author: Indeed. I turned this one into a sub-section, so that it stands out.

  Another solution is to click the three dots on the right (...) and enter your path.
- The 'Tools-Install packages' interface does not allow you to select any other path than the default in your ``$VSC_HOME``.
  It is recommended to use the ``install.packages`` function instead.
- RStudioServer will by default store the RStudio cache in ``$VSC_HOME/.local/share/rstudio``.
  This cache can get very large, and cause you to exceed the quota of your home directory.
  To avoid this, you can redirect this cache to your data directory by setting ``$XDG_DATA_HOME``
  variables in your ``~/.bashrc``.

  .. code-block:: bash

    echo "export XDG_DATA_HOME=$VSC_DATA/.local/share" >> ~/.bashrc

Tensorboard
-----------

Tensorboard is an app that allows you to visualize and measure different aspects of your machine learning workflow.
Have a look at the `official guidelines <https://www.tensorflow.org/tensorboard/get_started>`_ for more detailed information.

The Tensorboard interactive session requires you to specify a project (or log) directory in your submission options.
This is a relative directory starting from your ``$VSC_DATA``.

> It is not possible to navigate to the correct folder from within the app.

Reviewer 3: I don't really understand this sentence (in particular what 'correct folder' means here).

Author: Actually, this is a what we have on the official docs, since this page was created/approved. I also do not fully get it.
But, let me ping @w-lampaert for his idea on this.

Reviewer: The input data for tensorboard are always log files from a ML run. These get stored in a log directory by default. The Tensorboard app form has a project/log directory variable to specify, which should be the path to the log directory with the data you want to analyze. If you do not specify the correct directory here, the Tensorboard app will launch, but immediately give an error. Once within the session, you cannot change your working directory anymore. You can only cancel the job and start a new one with the correct directory specified under the project/log dir variable.

  use the same Conda environment).
  Go to 'Extensions', and click the settings wheel next to the R extension.
  Select 'Extension Settings' and search for the 'R > RTerm: Linux' setting.
  Paste the path to your Conda env there (``/path/to/miniconda/envs/<env_name>/lib/R``)

**Remarks:**

- To run your script line-by-line, place your cursor on a desired line, and press the key combination of
  'ctrl+enter' on your keyboard.

.. _ood_matlab_app:

MATLAB
------

To launch MATLAB via OnDemand, you need to additionally specify your desired version of the software
from the drop-down menu on the resource form.
Given that our current MATLAB installations automatically detect GPU devices and CUDA libraries,
you may also request GPU(s) as resources, if needed.

Once you launch the session, a remote `noVNC`_ desktop will start on a compute node.
Once the session starts, the selected MATLAB module will be loaded, and eventually the MATLAB GUI
will pop up (after waiting for few seconds).

.. warning::

   As the end-user, you are responsible for all consequences of sharing your MATLAB session with other
   VSC users.

>    So, think twice before sharing your sensitive data, sources and information by all means.

Reviewer 3: To me this comes a bit 'out of the blue'. What is meant here with 'sharing a MATLAB session with other users'? I suppose that would also help understand what would be MATLAB-specific about this concern.

Author: Correct. I moved the warning to where it belongs more naturally, i.e. just below the explanation for the 'View Only' button.

Once you launch a JupyterLab session, a default kernel called ``Python 3 (ipykernel)`` is already available in your session.
This kernel, in addition to the Python standard library, would enable using extra packages from
``SciPy-bundle`` and/or ``matplotlib``, if you selected them in the resource form.

.. warning::

   If you use JupyterLab as explained above, and you need to reproduce your numerical results 
   at any time in the future, make sure you stick to choosing the same 'Toolchain version'.

If the module-based environment explained above does not provide all packages that you need, then
it is recommended to manage your custom-made R or Python environments by creating custom Jupyter kernels.

Custom Conda environments
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you have not installed Conda in your account yet, please refer to the
:ref:`install Miniconda <install_miniconda_python>` page.

To create a custom kernel, first create a  :ref:`Python <create_python_conda_env>` or
:ref:`R <create_r_conda_env>` Conda environment. The second step consists of effectively
creating the kernel in your ``$VSC_HOME/.local/share`` folder (which is a defalt value for the

> ``$XDG_DATA_HOME`` environment variable), as Jupyter will look for kernels in this location.

Author: I added it as a remark at the bottom of the same section.

The following commands should be excecuted from a shell (e.g. using 'Login Server Shell Access'), and only need
to be done once for the set-up of each new kernel.
If you already have an existing Python kernel, but your JupyterLab session freezes/craches when choosing your
old kernel, you also need to repeat the following steps only once.
This starts with activating your Conda environment::

      source activate <env_name>

For Python you will need the ``ipykernel`` package installed in your Conda environment.
The minimum supported version for Python is 3.7 and for ``ipykernel`` package is 6.19.2::

      conda install ipykernel

Then you create the kernel as follows::

      python -m ipykernel install --user --env PYTHONPATH "" --name '<env_name>' --display-name '<kernel_name>'

> 

Author: see above.

Custom virtual environments for Python
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

One may create a customized kernel starting from a Python virtual environment, using one of Python modules.
Eventhough this approach can have advantages, but we do not recommend it, due to the fact that Python
virtual environments are architecture specific.

> Hence, on our current Tier-2 machines, this approach needs to be handled with care.

Reviewer 3: `due to the fact that Python virtual environments are architecture specific.`  -> this is not the case. Just as with Conda environments, it mostly depends on how you install the packages. If you're installing precompiled packages (e.g. from PyPI repos via `pip install ...` or from Conda repos via `conda install ...`), then these will have been compiled in such a way that compiled parts (if any) can run on any (x86) architecture (except perhaps very old ones).

When using Python installations from a module, then of course these Python modules are replicated for the different available architectures (Skylake, Cascadelake, ...). In practice, however, it's no problem to create a virtual environment with some `Python/3.X.Y-...` module on one architecture (say, Skylake) and then use this venv on another architecture (say, Genoa). At least that's what I've experienced so far. It's of course best to load `Python/3.X.Y-...` module for the architecture at hand (and not that of another architecture), but that's already how the module-based-JupyterLab-app is operating.

Also: while I wouldn't say we should explicitly recommend virtual environments (nor Conda environments, for that matter), I don't think we should discourage it either.

Author: I do not think so. Let's work it out by a way of example.
I have created a kernel from a venv, starting from `Python/3.11.3-GCCcore-12.3.0` on the wICE `interactive` partition. As a result of that, the first lines of my `kernel.json` read:
```
{
 "argv": [
  "/vsc-hard-mounts/leuven-data/307/vsc30745/tests/ondemand/jupyterlab/test_venv_kernel/bin/python",
...
```
when I look up the `python` exactuable pointed at above, I see that it is a softlink pointing at the Python executable on IceLake nodes:
```
ls -l /vsc-hard-mounts/leuven-data/307/vsc30745/tests/ondemand/jupyterlab/test_venv_kernel/bin/python
lrwxrwxrwx 1 vsc30745 vsc30745 82 Jun 14 10:40 /vsc-hard-mounts/leuven-data/307/vsc30745/tests/ondemand/jupyterlab/test_venv_kernel/bin/python -> /apps/leuven/rocky8/icelake/2023a/software/Python/3.11.3-GCCcore-12.3.0/bin/python
```
Now, if I start a job on any architecture other than IceLake nodes, my kernel wil l freeze/crach (I tested this and I saw it).

The reason for the issue is not the extra packages that we install with `pip` into our venv, but is the non-portability of the architecture-specific binaries.

Reviewer: Perhaps this can be explained more correctly then. I would omit the part that says that it is architecture-specific, but rather say something like:

'If you want to use Python venvs, be aware that you can only use that venv for the specific architecture you created it on, as the kernel will link to the specific Python module/version it was created with. This means that on other architectures, that module won't be available, which will result in the crashing of your kernel.'

Reviewer 3: Ehsan: could you describe your example in more detail? Because I myself cannot reproduce it (i.e. so far I haven't had problems of that sort), perhaps my own test is too simple:

Just now, I created a venv based on a Python/3.9.5-... module from `icelake/2021a` on a wICE interactive node in which I installed NumPy and then created the kernel for it. I then used OOD in test to launch JupyterLab (with 2021a toolchain version; no scriptlet) on the test batch partition, so with skylake-6132 CPUs. I could just select my kernel for a new notebook and e.g. calculate some dot products with NumPy. And just to emphasize: in this situation, the Python interpreter used is the skylake-6132-installed one (which is indeed a requirement for this to work).

Author: I admit that it is possible to create venv on one arch and use it on another arch, as I verified on both sandbox skylake nodes and wice sapphire rapids nodes.
The commit 9808326 shall reflect the changes to the text under the venv section.

If you are interested in this approach, follow these steps to create and use your kernel:

- Pick a specific Python from a specific 'Toolchain version', e.g. ``Python/3.11.3-GCCcore-12.3.0``
  from ``2023a``
- Choose a specific architecture, e.g. Sapphire Rapids nodes on wICE
- Start an :ref:`Interactive Shell<interactive_shell>` on the targeted architecture,

>   and execute the following:

Reviewer 3: I think it is best to have 'basic' and 'advanced' scenarios:
- What is currently written here would correspond to the 'advanced' one, where the user anticipates that architecture-dependent installations will be needed. This is normally only needed under certain circumstances (e.g. when installing some packages requires compiling extensions from source).
- So probably best to start with a simpler 'basic' scenario (before showing the more advanced case) where the architecture dependence is not explicitly considered, e.g.:
```bash
     python -m venv ${VSC_DATA}/venv_science_2023a
     (etcetera)
```

Author: The text in the JupyterLab secion has already grown, and I prefer to keep it as least complex as possible. Splitting a sub-section into two scenarios just adds to the length of the text and its complexity, which I strongly like to avoid here.
Users who want to create a kernel out of Python venv are already advanced users, so they shall follow only one set of instructions. This is preferable on the support-side.
For that reason, I prefer to keep only one scenario here.

  .. code-block :: bash

     TOOLCHAIN='2023a'

>      DIR_VENV=${VSC_DATA}/${VSC_OS_LOCAL}/${VSC_ARCH_LOCAL}${VSC_ARCH_SUFFIX}/${TOOLCHAIN}

Author: yes it is.

     mkdir -p ${DIR_VENV}

>      module use /apps/leuven/${VSC_OS_LOCAL}/${VSC_ARCH_LOCAL}${VSC_ARCH_SUFFIX}/${TOOLCHAIN}/modules/all

Author: This is unfortunately needed when using interactive shell apps, because cluster modules are not automatically loaded. See https://gitea.icts.kuleuven.be/coz/ood/issues/13

>      module use /apps/leuven/${VSC_OS_LOCAL}/${VSC_ARCH_LOCAL}${VSC_ARCH_SUFFIX}/${TOOLCHAIN}/modules/all

Author: I added a line of comment above it, to explain when the `module use ...` is needed.

     module load Python/3.11.3-GCCcore-12.3.0
     python -m venv ${DIR_VENV}
     source ${DIR_VENV}/bin/activate
     pip install --prefix=${DIR_VENV} ipykernel <additional packages>

>      # note that below, --env is not needed

Author: done

     python -m ipykernel install --user --name '<env_name>' --display-name '<kernel_name>'
     # you need this below
     echo ${DIR_VENV}

- On the JupyterLab form, choose a partition that matches your choice of architecture;
  also, pick the same 'Toolchain version' as above.

>   In the 'Pre-run scriptlet' box, insert ``source <path/pointing/to/DIR_VENV>/bin/activate``.

Author: Correct. I took that line out.

- Once you connect to your session, your new ``<kernel_name>`` is ready to be used.
  To verify your setup, you can execute ``import sys; sys.executable`` in your notebook,
  and the resulting path shall point at ``DIR_VENV`` where you installed your virtual environment.

Custom R environments
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For R, you need both the ``jupyter_client`` and the ``irkernel`` packages installed.
With the following command you can create the kernel::

      Rscript -e 'IRkernel::installspec(name="<env_name>", displayname="<kernel_name>")'

Once the kernel is created, you will see it in the 'Launcher' menu.
You can now start working in your own customized environment.
Note that all user kernels are stored by default in ``${VSC_HOME}/.local/share/jupyter/kernels``

> (where ``${VSC_HOME}/.local/share`` is the default value for ``$XDG_DATA_HOME``);

Author: Agreed. I have created a 'Note' block at the bottom of the JupyterLab section, to elaborate a bit about `XDG_DATA_HOME`.

This is put in place to ensure that these resources are kept for their original purpose, namely the interactive work.

If for some reason some of these limitations are too strict for you, or you need resources that are not available on
the interactive nodes (e.g. a full GPU, big memory nodes), you can always request nodes from another partition.
Remember however that these interactive apps are not meant for running full jobs.
If you indeed need multiple nodes or full GPUs to test your code/program, go ahead and request the resources for
your interactive app from a more suitable partition.
In the case that you have passed the testing phase, and you want to start conducting experiments,
we recommend that you make the switch to batch jobs instead, as they will not require your presence to start your code.

.. _interactive_shell:

> Interactive shell

Reviewer: Perhaps we should shortly explain the issue with the module loading here as well (https://gitea.icts.kuleuven.be/coz/ood/issues/13)

you can also choose from different 'Toolchain and Python versions' from a drop-down menu.
An example would be '2023a and ``Python/3.11.3-GCCcore-12.3.0``'.
Based on that choice, the corresponding JupyterLab module will be loaded together with its
dependencies (specifically Python).

Furthermore, you may optionally choose to load ``SciPy-bundle`` (for widely-used packages like ``scipy``,
``numpy``, ``pandas`` and more) and/or ``matplotlib`` in your environment from the same toolchain.

Once you launch a JupyterLab session, a default kernel called ``Python 3 (ipykernel)`` is already available in your session.
This kernel, in addition to the Python standard library, would enable using extra packages from
``SciPy-bundle`` and/or ``matplotlib``, if you selected them in the resource form.

.. warning::

   If you use JupyterLab in this way, remember to be consistent in your choice of toolchain version
   as this e.g. determines the version of Python that will be used.

If these modules does not provide all Python packages that you need, then you can locally install
these extra packages, followed by installing the corresponding Jupyter kernel  (see

> "Custom virtual environments for Python" below).

Author: done in 8f94b21.

Conda environments for Python
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you have not installed Conda in your account yet, please refer to the
:ref:`install Miniconda <install_miniconda_python>` page.

> To create a custom kernel, first create a  :ref:`Python <create_python_conda_env>` or

Author: done in 07f2f6d

creating the kernel. 
The following commands should be excecuted from a shell (e.g. using 'Login Server Shell Access'), and only need
to be done once for the set-up of each new kernel.
If you already have an existing Python kernel, but your JupyterLab session freezes/craches when choosing your
old kernel, you also need to repeat the following steps only once.
This starts with activating your Conda environment::

      source activate <env_name>

For Python you will need the ``ipykernel`` package installed in your Conda environment.
The minimum supported version for Python is 3.7 and for ``ipykernel`` package is 6.19.2::

      conda install ipykernel

Then you create the kernel as follows::

      python -m ipykernel install --user --env PYTHONPATH "" --name '<env_name>' --display-name '<kernel_name>'

Custom virtual environments for Python
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> One may create a customized kernel starting from a Python virtual environment, using one of Python modules.

Author: done

  and the resulting path shall point at ``DIR_VENV`` where you installed your virtual environment.

**Remarks:**

- If one your package installation steps involves compiling source code, then you might only be able to
  use your virtual environment on the same architecture where the compilation was carried out. 
  This remark does not apply to typical ``pip`` usage where precompiled 'wheels' get downloaded and installed
  and which can therefore be used on any architecture.

Conda environments for R
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For R, you need both the ``jupyter_client`` and the ``irkernel`` Conda packages installed.
With the following command you can create the kernel::

      Rscript -e 'IRkernel::installspec(name="<env_name>", displayname="<kernel_name>")'

Once the kernel is created, you will see it in the 'Launcher' menu.
You can now start working in your own customized environment.

For more general information, please refer to the `official JupyterLab documentation`_.

**Remarks:**

- The top-level notebook directory is by default ``$VSC_DATA``.
- At the moment, we do not support installing extensions in JupyterLab.

> .. note::

Author: In 1c9bf78, I moved up the remarks to the beginning of the JupyterLab section, before the "Pure Python environments".

However, the scope of the 'Note' box applies to all Python/R Conda/venv kernels. 
The problem with (our) restructured text is that the subsectioning is not fully clear, eventhough we have consistently used correct underline characters for the (sub)section titles. As a result, the 'Note' box appears below the R Conda section, but in practice it shall belong to all kernel-driven envs.

> .. note::

Reviewer 3: Well, you could still move the Note up to the beginning of the section, right? Then that's also where it will appear. But on second thought it is probably best to not move that Note to the top (only the remarks, as you just did), since it's too detailed to be placed at the beginning.

How about this:
First it would indeed be great if the (sub, subsub, ...)section titles on this page would get numbered. I don't think that really has to do with how the titles are underlined, but how the page's [TOC tree](https://documatt.com/restructuredtext-reference/element/toctree.html) is set up. Could you look into that?
Then it would just be a matter of adding another `Remarks` subsection after the R Conda subsection to include additional notes (such as this one) and the numbering will then make clear that this applies to the whole JupyterLab section.

> .. note::

Author: I tried out enumerating the (sub)sections, and it did not turn out a success, because:
- the 'Note' box did still sit below the same subsection for 'Conda environment for R', and it did not look like belonging to the whole JupyterLab section
- the section enumeration does not impose indenting the subsections, or making them recognizable. So, the ambiguity stayed.

Instead, I created a new sub(sub?)section under the JupyterLab section, and move the 'Note' block up inside this one. You may see it in 1e7a459.

> .. note::

Author: @MaximeVdB what about the changes in c24eff6? The sections are only numbered, without (a long) table of content.

> .. note::

Reviewer 3: Yes that looks pretty good (the only downside being that the page title itself also gets numbered; but it looks like there is not an easy way to avoid that, so for the time being this is OK for me).

   User kernels are stored by default in ``${VSC_HOME}/.local/share/jupyter/kernels``.
   To override this and store your kernel specifications in a non-default location,
   you may drop the following line in your ``${VSC_HOME}/.bashrc``::

      export XDG_DATA_HOME=${VSC_DATA}/.local/share

>    If you have created multiple kernels (for Python and R), you find the corresponding
>    directories under ``${XDG_DATA_HOME}/jupyter/kernels``.

Reviewer 3: I found this to be a bit unclear and I think this would improve it:
```suggestion
   When the ``${XDG_DATA_HOME}`` variable is set, subsequent kernel installations
   (for both Python and R) will reside in ``${XDG_DATA_HOME}/jupyter/kernels``.
```

  (R gets attached as soon as you start it).
- You can also set the path to the R version that needs to be attached (better if you always
  use the same Conda environment).
  Go to 'Extensions', and click the settings wheel next to the R extension.
  Select 'Extension Settings' and search for the 'R > RTerm: Linux' setting.
  Paste the path to your Conda env there (``/path/to/miniconda/envs/<env_name>/lib/R``)

**Remarks:**

- To run your script line-by-line, place your cursor on a desired line, and press the key combination of
  'ctrl+enter' on your keyboard.

.. _ood_matlab_app:

MATLAB
------

To launch MATLAB via OnDemand, you need to additionally specify your desired version of the software
from the drop-down menu on the resource form.
Given that our current MATLAB installations automatically detect GPU devices and CUDA libraries,
you may also request GPU(s) as resources, if needed.

Once you launch the session, a remote `noVNC`_ desktop will start on a compute node.
Once the session starts, the selected MATLAB module will be loaded, and eventually the MATLAB GUI
will pop up (after waiting for few seconds).

> 

Reviewer 2: Best to add here an additional remark, that Matlab will only be usable by users that are in a license group for Matlab.
This remark can be site specific, as for us this is group lli_matlab but could be something else for Gent, Antwerp or VUB.

Author: Given that this page is already site-specific, I just added a 'Note' block about the license. Please see 1e67e1a.
